# 15 Constrained in will

## To be constrained in will,

lofty in action,
aloof from the world,
apart from its customs,
elevated in discourse,
sullen and critical,
indignation his whole concern---such is the life favored by the scholar in his mountain valley,
the man who condemns the world,
the worn and haggard one who means to end it all with a plunge into the deep.

To discourse on benevolence,
righteousness,
loyalty,
and good faith,
to be courteous,
temperate,
modest,
and deferential,
moral training his whole concern---such is the life favored by the scholar who seeks to bring the world to order,
the man who teaches and instructs,
who at home and abroad lives for learning.

To talk of great accomplishments,
win a great name,
define the etiquette of ruler and subject,
regulate the position of superior and inferior,
the ordering of the state his only concern---such is the life favored by the scholar of court and council,
the man who would honor his sovereign and strengthen his country,
the bringer of accomplishment,
the annexer of territory.

To repair to the thickets and ponds,
living idly in the wilderness,
angling for fish in solitary places,
inaction his only concern---such is the life favored by the scholar of the rivers and seas,
the man who withdraws from the world,
the unhurried idler.

To pant,
to puff,
to hail,
to sip,
to spit out the old breath and draw in the new,
practicing bear-hangings and bird-stretchings,
longevity his only concern---such is the life favored by the scholar who practices Induction,
the man who nourishes his body,
who hopes to live to be as old as Pengcu.[^15-1]

### But to attain loftiness without constraining the will;


to achieve moral training without benevolence and righteousness,
good order without accomplishments and fame,
leisure without rivers and seas,
long life without Induction;

to lose everything and yet possess everything,
at ease in the illimitable,
where all good things come to attend---this is the Way of Heaven and earth,
the Virtue of the sage.

So it is said,
Limpidity,
silence,
emptiness,
inaction---these are the level of Heaven and earth,
the substance of the Way and its Virtue.

So it is said,
The sage rests;

with rest comes peaceful ease,
with peaceful ease comes limpidity,
and where there is ease and limpidity,
care and worry cannot get at him,
noxious airs cannot assault him.

Therefore his Virtue is complete and his spirit unimpaired.

### So it is said,

With the sage,
his life is the working of Heaven,
his death the transformation of things.

In stillness,
he and the yin share a single Virtue;

in motion,
he and the yang share a single flow.

He is not the bearer of good fortune or the initiator of bad fortune.

Roused by something outside himself,
only then does he respond;

pressed,
only then does he move;

finding he has no choice,
only then does he rise up.

He discards knowledge and purpose and follows along with the reasonableness of Heaven.

Therefore he incurs no disaster from Heaven,
no entanglement from things,
no opposition from man,
no blame from the spirits.

His life is a floating,
his death a rest.

He does not ponder or scheme,
does not plot for the future.

A man of light,
he does not shine;

of good faith,
he keeps no promises.

He sleeps without dreaming,
wakes without worry.

His spirit is pure and clean,
his soul never wearied.

In emptiness,
nonbeing,
and limpidity,
he joins with the Virtue of Heaven.

### So it is said,

Grief and happiness are perversions of Virtue;

joy and anger are transgressions of the Way;

love and hate are offenses against Virtue.

When the mind is without care or joy,
this is the height of Virtue.

When it is unified and unchanging,
this is the height of stillness.

When it grates against nothing,
this is the height of emptiness.

When it has no commerce with things,
this is the height of limpidity.

When it rebels against nothing,
this is the height of purity.

### So it is said,

If the body is made to labor and take no rest,
it will wear out;

if the spiritual essence is taxed without cessation,
it will grow weary,
and weariness will bring exhaustion.

It is the nature of water that if it is not mixed with other things,
it will be clear,
and if nothing stirs it,
it will be level.

But if it is dammed and hemmed in and not allowed to flow,
then it,
too,
will cease to be clear.

As such,
it is a symbol of Heavenly Virtue.

So it is said,
To be pure,
clean,
and mixed with nothing;

still,
unified,
and unchanging;

limpid and inactive;

moving with the workings of Heaven---this is the way to care for the spirit.

### The man who owns a sword from Gan or Yue lays it in a box and stores it away,

not daring to use it,
for to him it is the greatest of treasures.

Pure spirit reaches in the four directions,
flows now this way,
now that---there is no place it does not extend to.

Above,
it brushes Heaven;

below,
it coils on the earth.

It transforms and nurses the ten thousand things,
but no one can make out its form.

Its name is called One-with-Heaven.

The way to purity and whiteness is to guard the spirit,
this alone;

guard it and never lose it,
and you will become one with spirit,
one with its pure essence,
which communicates and mingles with the Heavenly Order.[^15-2]

The common saying has it,
"The ordinary man prizes gain,
the man of integrity prizes name,
the worthy man honors ambition,
the sage values spiritual essence." Whiteness means there is nothing mixed in;

purity means the spirit is never impaired.

He who can embody purity and whiteness may be called the True Man.

