# 16 Mending the inborn nature

## Those who set about mending the inborn nature through vulgar learning,

hoping thereby to return once more to the Beginning;

those who set about muddling their desires through vulgar ways of thought,
hoping thereby to attain clarity---they may be called the blind and benighted people.[^16-1]

### The men of ancient times who practiced the Way employed tranquillity to cultivate knowledge.


Knowledge lived in them,
yet they did nothing for its sake.

So they may be said to have employed knowledge to cultivate tranquillity.

Knowledge and tranquillity took turns cultivating each other,
and harmony and order emerged from the inborn nature.

### Virtue is harmony,

the Way is order.

When Virtue embraces all things,
we have benevolence.

When the Way is in all respects well ordered,
we have righteousness.

When righteousness is clearly understood and all things cling to it,
we have loyalty.

When within there is purity,
fullness,
and a return to true form,
we have music.

When good faith is expressed in face and body and there is a compliance with elegance,
we have rites.

But if all emphasis is placed on the conduct of rites and music,
then the world will fall into disorder.

The ruler,
in his efforts to rectify,
will draw a cloud over his own virtue,
and his virtue will no longer extend to all things.

And should he try to force it to extend,
then things would invariably lose their in-born nature.[^16-2]

### The men of old dwelled in the midst of crudity and chaos;


side by side with the rest of the world,
they attained simplicity and silence there.

At that time the yin and yang were harmonious and still;

ghosts and spirits worked no mischief;

the four seasons kept to their proper order;

the ten thousand things knew no injury;

and living creatures were free from premature death.

Although men had knowledge,
they did not use it.

This was called the Perfect Unity.

At this time,
no one made a move to do anything,
and there was unvarying spontaneity.

### The time came,

however,
when Virtue began to dwindle and decline,
and then Suiren and Fu Xi stepped forward to take charge of the world.

As a result there was compliance,
but no longer any unity.

Virtue continued to dwindle and decline,
and then Shennong and the Yellow Emperor stepped forward to take charge of the world.

As a result,
there was security but no longer any compliance.

Virtue continued to dwindle and decline,
and then Yao and Shun stepped forward to take charge of the world.[^16-3]

They set about in various fashions to order and transform the world and,
in doing so,
defiled purity and shattered simplicity.

The Way was pulled apart for the sake of goodness;

Virtue was imperiled for the sake of conduct.

After this,
inborn nature was abandoned,
and minds were set free to roam,
mind joining with mind in understanding;

there was knowledge,
but it could not bring stability to the world.

After this,
"culture" was added,
and "breadth" was piled on top.

"Culture" destroyed the substantial;

"breadth" drowned the mind;

and after this,
the people began to be confused and disordered.

They had no way to revert to the true form of their inborn nature or to return once more to the Beginning.

### From this we may see that the world has lost the Way and the Way has lost the world;


the world and the Way have lost each other.

What means does a man of the Way have to go forward in the world?

What means does the world have to go forward in the Way?

The Way cannot go forward in the world,
and the world cannot go forward in the Way.

So although the sage does not retire to dwell in the midst of the mountain forest,
his Virtue is already hidden.

It is already hidden,
and therefore he does not need to hide it himself.

### The so-called scholars in hiding of ancient times did not conceal their bodies and refuse to let them be seen;


they did not shut in their words and refuse to let them out;

they did not stow away their knowledge and refuse to share it.

But the fate of the times was too much awry.

If the fate of the times had been with them and they could have done great deeds in the world,
then they would have returned to Unity and left no trace behind.

But the fate of the times was against them and brought them only great hardship in the world,
and therefore they deepened their roots,
rested in perfection,
and waited.

This was the way they kept themselves alive.[^16-4]

### Those in ancient times who wished to keep themselves alive did not use eloquence to ornament their knowledge.


They did not use their knowledge to make trouble for the world;

they did not use their knowledge to make trouble for Virtue.

Loftily they kept to their places and returned to their inborn nature.

Having done that,
what more was there for them to do?

The Way has no use for petty conduct;

Virtue has no use for petty understanding.

Petty understanding injures Virtue;

petty conduct injures the Way.

Therefore it is said,
Rectify yourself,
that is all.[^16-5]

When joy is complete,
this is called the fulfillment of ambition.

### When the men of ancient times spoke of the fulfillment of ambition,

they did not mean fine carriages and caps.

They meant simply that joy was so complete that it could not be made greater.

Nowadays,
however,
when men speak of the fulfillment of ambition,
they mean fine carriages and caps.

But carriages and caps affect the body alone,
not the inborn nature and fate.

Such things from time to time may happen to come your way.

When they come,
you cannot keep them from arriving,
but when they depart,
you cannot stop them from going.

Therefore carriages and caps are no excuse for becoming puffed up with pride,
and hardship and poverty are no excuse for fawning on the vulgar.

You should find the same joy in one condition as in the other and thereby be free of care,
that is all.

But now,
when the things that happened take their leave,
you cease to be joyful.

From this point of view,
though you have joy,
it will always be fated for destruction.

Therefore it is said,
Those who destroy themselves in things and lose their inborn nature in the vulgar may be called the upside-down people.

